[Music]
so
origins
the day on which i make this video marks
a beginning
a new origin
at the conclusion of each chapter of his
book the beginning of infinity david
deutsch lists different senses in which
the phrase beginning of infinity can be
understood through the lens of concepts
explained in that chapter
a beginning of infinity could be the
start of some new entity process way of
thinking or doing way of moving forward
correcting errors
making progress solving problems
understanding more deeply or more
broadly being able to do more
to do everything to show what is
possible and achieve it and see further
off still into a deeper unknown of
potential discoveries without limit
except that which the laws of physics
mandate
a beginning of infinity is what allows
us to make unbounded progress off
into an infinite future
but besides what the laws of physics
mandate we cannot do
only our imaginations bound what we will
make possible and that our imaginations
are only bounded by our telling
ourselves what is not possible when in
truth anything that can be achieved
really can be achieved given the right
knowledge
and the right knowledge begins in our
imaginations before being tested against
reality
telescopes can inspire as well as
require
our imaginations
we can see what we expect in a new way
and it can inspire us
and we can sometimes see that which we
didn't expect and cannot yet explain
requiring genuine imagination to solve
the problem of
what is causing that
today nasa released five images the
first five images from the james webb
space telescope a telescope that is not
on earth or even strictly in orbit
exactly around the earth but rather in
orbit around the sun at a distance of
1.5 million kilometers from the earth
which is about four times further away
than the moon is
hubble on the other hand the hubble
space telescope is in orbit around the
earth and is only about 570 kilometers
above the surface of it the james webb
telescope orbits at what is called the
l2 point
when there are three bodies mutually
orbiting one another known as the
three-body problem there are various
ways they can orbit a common center of
mass in a stable way in fact there are
five such ways five such solutions found
by joseph louis lagrange so lagrange
gives us the l in l2 and the second of
those solutions gives us the two hence
the l2 orbit
webb actually orbits around the l2 point
in a circle of circumference roughly
equal to that of the moon's orbit around
the earth and it covers that distance
over the course of six months and this
keeps it nice and safe from the heat of
the sun because well it's an infrared
telescope and it does its work best when
its instruments are kept exceedingly
cold it is after all detecting
wavelengths associated with warm things
and both the sun and the earth are very
warm and so appear very very bright to
it the james webb telescope has
demonstrated over the last couple of
days and will continue to show what a
leap in technology it is over the hubble
one of the most amazing pictures ever
taken by hubble was the so-called hubble
deep field and then the hubble ultra
deep field and its successes
here is the first one of those the
hubble deep field
this took two weeks of exposure
two weeks of pointing the telescope at
the same patch of sky collecting a tiny
amount of light hour after hour from
that exceedingly dark patch and adding
it all together into the single image
that you now see
aside from the pointy things which are
actually stars in our own galaxy
everything else there is a single entire
galaxy even though theory already told
us that this should have been the case
that the universe was filled with
galaxies
the observation itself is still stunning
if not surprising well what hubble did
in two weeks to gather that image
webb did in just a few hours and at
higher resolution and detail even though
it is using longer infrared wavelengths
truly phenomenal
webb has
four science instruments on board it's
not merely a telescope with mirrors and
lenses as one might think so when you
think telescope in this case think a
finely tuned system of computers cameras
mirrors and a whole laboratory on board
it's an unmanned astronomy laboratory
more than anything its four instruments
are a part of the entire telescope
called i sim the integrated science
instrument module let's have a look at
these four instruments and then we'll
have a look at the images the first
instrument is called nearspec the near
infrared spectrograph it can analyze
light with a wavelength of between 0.6
to 5 microns a micron is a micrometer a
thousandth of a millimeter itself a
thousandth of a meter this is longer
than usual visible light which is in
nanometers but never mind that a
spectrograph an instrument like this
allows us to tell the chemical makeup of
whatever light is passed through it and
this tells us not only the chemistry but
also accurate measurements of things
like the temperature of the object we're
looking at whether it's the entire
object or part of the object the second
instrument is the
kneecam the near infrared camera well if
you're going to have a spectrograph on
board that we just mentioned you might
want to collect that light as well near
cam does that it can look at pretty much
anything in the universe you can imagine
from stuff in our own solar system
through to galaxies nearby all the way
out to the earliest and therefore most
distant stars and galaxies that can be
seen
third is miri the mid infrared
instrument it's just like niri the
previous instrument but looks at even
longer wavelengths like 5 to 28 microns
but this instrument also includes the
camera on board so it's a two-in-one
kind of a deal unlike the previous two
instruments and finally the fourth
instrument is fgs or neris the fine
guidance sensor or near infrared imager
and slitless spectrograph this is for
precision pointing of the telescope and
in particular an instrument especially
geared for the observations needed to
analyze exoplanets so this is why i'm
saying it's like a laboratory in space
more than just a telescope but it's not
like space telescopes or ground
telescopes aren't already laboratories
of a kind with other instruments
attached to them attached to what they
call the light bucket itself the thing
for collecting the light but in general
i guess people outside of astronomy
might think well these things are just
like galileo's telescope only bigger and
in space
but not quite it is indeed the james
webb space telescope
a whole set of instruments for measuring
stuff as well as just observing pretty
pictures and it's the measuring of stuff
like the precise wavelengths of light
being emitted by distant objects that
tells us what they're made of
that is the science of spectroscopy a
phenomenal field of science we don't
have to travel to the stars and take a
chemical sample and bring it back to the
chemistry labs here on earth instead we
just take a sample of the light and that
has the same information in it well
perhaps not all the information but much
of what we're interested in but if this
telescope is taking pictures using
infrared light and our eyes use visible
light how can we see these pretty colors
of the pictures it has taken well that's
where the processing comes in there are
lots of infrared telescopes that exist
already many are on the top of mountains
they try to get above the clouds and
above lots of the water vapor in our
atmosphere which tends to absorb
infrared radiation so having one in
space is perfect because the atmosphere
is not getting in the way nor is the
interference from heat from the earth
from ground-based sources but because
it's not taking pictures in the visible
wave bands processing has to be done so
our eyes can make sense of what is being
detected so
filters are used and choices have to be
made by people there is therefore a
little bit of a fusion of art with
science here red green and blue filters
are applied to the various wavelengths
of light it's like translating from
mandarin to english you won't get a
perfect one-to-one correspondence
between the infrared and the visible
pictures that you see but you certainly
can get a very accurate version of the
idea but there is a choice to be made
and well there's nothing else for it we
can't see with our own eyes infrared so
to see the truly spectacular we must
translate and anyways even if we were
using visible light we would not be
seeing the images directly we never see
anything directly at all after all
telescopes and eyes are made of stuff
that collect photons we do the job of
interpreting photons this is just
another layer of interpreting photons
and we have theories about how that
interpretation works so that we know
what we're seeing so if it's said the
colors are not real in some sense in
what sense are the colors of hubble real
or of any telescope real what does real
mean here all colors all images are
interpretations of a collection of
photons that appear on photographic
plates or ccds digital cameras and
computer screens and that kind of thing
these images exist precisely because
human eyes cannot see those objects
whether they be your standard telescopes
or your hubble space telescope or
whatever those objects can't be seen
without those telescopes in the first
place all telescopes are in a sense
adding sensors to human cognition super
senses and this is just one way in which
we humans are becoming more and more
godlike or if you don't like that
superhero like with our technology in
fact among all of his superpowers i'm
not sure even superman's vision allowed
him to see what the james webb space
telescope can and speaking of that man
of red and blue in these james webb
images which are colored yes
artificially as almost all pictures in
astronomy are the shortest wavelengths
are blue and therefore they indicate the
hot regions the longest and therefore
the coolest regions are colored red
so let's talk about the first five
images that have been released by the
james webb space telescope the first
image here was taken by near cam and
it's of a galaxy cluster and the galaxy
cluster the technical name is
smacks0723 and it's james webb's first
deep field
a deep field is well a picture that's
taken of the very far deep reaches of
the universe every point there apart
from the things with points around them
that look like stars which are stars
every other point is a galaxy the stars
that you can see and usually in these
situations when you have deep fields and
you see things that look like stars they
are stars within our own galaxy in the
foreground and this particular image has
also allowed us to see the spectra of a
red galaxy that red galaxy is
billion light years away and in that
spectra appears oxygen the element
oxygen which is promising oxygen from
the first generation of stars perhaps
which has appeared only 700 000 years or
so after the big bang so somehow or
other a first generation of stars had to
explode and go supernova spewing their
contents into the galaxy which we now
detect that's some very short-lived
stars because we know
that oxygen was not produced during the
big bang there are side by side images
like this one that show you the same
region of space taken by hubble and now
compared to the james webb space
telescope at much higher resolution and
here's a video that gives an idea of the
size of the patch of sky
this deep field represents it's said to
be like a grain of sand held at arm's
length and that would seem to undersell
things a little this is a tiny tiny
patch of sky and yet looking at it there
are thousands upon thousands of galaxies
and if you were to zoom in in the dark
regions between those galaxies you'd see
even more still the next picture doesn't
look like a picture of anything it looks
like a graph
but
it's an image of a sort of an exoplanet
and the name of that exoplanet is wasp
96b
it may not look spectacular but much of
astronomy happens to be like this and we
cannot image or see exoplanets directly
we can't take pictures of them because
well they're too small too far away and
their light is absolutely swamped by
their host star
this graph represents the behavior of
the star's light in the atmosphere of
the planet
the star and the planet are a thousand
light years away and the planet is a hot
gaseous giant the spectra covers
infrared wavelengths to a much higher
level of detail than we've seen before
and what we're seeing is the transit of
the exoplanet the atmosphere passing in
front of the star and the light passing
through that atmosphere so that some of
it gets absorbed and what is absorbed is
characteristic of what the atmosphere is
made of and in this case importantly the
absorption spectra shows there's water
vapor in that exoplanet phenomenal but
it's closer to its star than mercury is
to the sun and for someone like me who
was trained on the idea that gaseous
giant stars couldn't possibly exist very
close to their host stars observations
like this are phenomenal overturning
previous theories that theory that you
couldn't have hot gas giant planets very
very close to their host stars that
theory well that was overturned quite a
while ago we started seeing exoplanets
very close to their host stars but
astronomy tends to do this it tends to
throw up these problems which require
new theories the imagination of
astronomers has to be employed to figure
out how can you have hot gaseous planets
all that gas very close to hot stars
without all the gas being blown away off
into outer space by the radiation and
heat well i think much of this is still
open to being properly understood this
is a picture of the nebula called the
southern ring nebula also known as a
planetary nebula called so because they
were mistaken for planets because at the
center you've got this little bright
thing and around it you've got this ring
of material so it kind of looks like
saturn with the rings around a central
body of course nothing to do with an
actual planet in the center of a
planetary nebula typically you have a
dying star a star not unlike the sun
towards the end of its life where it
doesn't explode but more gently releases
parts of its atmosphere off into outer
space in this case what we have actually
are two stars one of which is in the
process of dying and one of which isn't
they're a binary system in mutual orbit
around each other or rather their common
center of mass the image on the left is
taken with near cam then the image on
the right taken with me cam so one has
the near infrared and one has the mid
infrared wavelengths of light just
different wavelengths of light enabling
us to see different levels of detail we
can even see rays of light or beams of
light as if coming through a cloud
because that's in fact what's happening
like the light from the sun as it comes
beaming through clouds when there's a
break in the clouds the same sort of
thing is happening here where you can
see streaks of light that have come from
the central star through the clouds of
gas as you get closer to the star of
course the gas there is hotter and as
you get further away the gas is cooler
and you get out so far that you have
molecular hydrogen and around some of
this molecular hydrogen can coalesce
things like oxygen so you get rather
complicated molecules out there but near
to the star everything's ionized so the
gas there is ionized and therefore much
much hotter this is why this is what
explains the slightly different coloring
different chemical compositions within
the gas cloud and different temperatures
of those chemicals that are there this
is actually the largest image of the
series that has been released by nasa
from the james webb space telescope it's
known as stefan's quintet or is it
steven's quintet anyway the quintet is
five galaxies that can be pictured here
at least two of them are in the process
of colliding but all five of them are
gravitationally bound together it's got
150 million pixels and is made up of the
composition of a thousand separate
images all combined together that's how
big this thing happens to be galaxy
collisions like this occur over the
course of millions or tens of millions
or hundreds of millions and in some case
billions of years so we only ever get to
see a snapshot it's not like we get to
see them moving as they collide hence we
do simulations of galaxy collisions
inside of supercomputers and then test
what our models of those collisions
alike by comparing the output of the
models with real-life things like
pictures such as these if our models are
correct then we should produce inside of
our supercomputers pictures that look
like this that's how we compare the
theory with the reality that's out there
and check our understanding error
correct and move forward for me this is
my favorite this picture of stellar
birth it's the karina nebula
images like this were also taken to the
same region of sky by the hubble
telescope and they were spectacular as
well
this is a stellar nursery where stars
are being born you can see towards the
top the really bright stars that are
there they were once part of the cloud
they were born out of the material from
that cloud and now because they're hot
they're pushing the cloud away the
radiation and the particles are
literally crashing into the material of
that cloud which is thousands of light
years across and pushing it down towards
the bottom of the page this nebula this
big cloud of gas is inside the milky way
galaxy compared to the other images
we've seen it's relatively close it's
only 7 600 light years away not as close
as the exoplanet one but certainly a lot
closer than the deep field compared to
the hubble space telescope image of the
same region we're seeing here hundreds
of stars we have never seen before
there are things here according to
astrophysicists commenting on this
picture that they cannot yet explain and
that is why this is one of my favorite
images because that's exciting if they
can't explain it they're going to have
to come up creatively with new ideas
perhaps some new astrophysical theories
to explain what the heck we're seeing or
at least the repurposing of old
astrophysical theories in a new way that
hasn't been done before whatever the
case it's going to take creative problem
solving from the astrophysics community
to figure out what's going on here the
scale of an image like this is just hard
to get across but certainly if you were
to take the entire solar system all the
way out to the orbit of neptune and to
put it into that cloud somewhere you
wouldn't see it it wouldn't show up as
one pixel that's how massive this thing
happens to be looking ever closer at
images like this or taking images like
this of other parts of the galaxy and
other parts of the universe are we going
to see evidence of alien civilizations
in any of these images or ever we can't
know now we do know that look back time
is a thing so perhaps we could see
evidence of an alien civilization here
if only we knew what we were looking for
but the deeper into space we look the
further back in time we are seeing
because the light reaching us is that
much older it has taken so much longer
for that light to reach us so if we are
looking at a galaxy 12 billion light
years away and we can see hundreds of
billions perhaps trillions of those we
are also seeing them as they were 12
billion years ago which would be a mere
1.7 billion years or so after the big
bang this means that if we want to see
evidence in those galaxies of alien
civilizations those civilizations would
need to come from a quite possibly a
first generation of stars made solely of
big bang material consisting only of
hydrogen and helium and then after those
stars go supernova we need the time to
wait for those clouds of gas and
enriched material to come together but
as we've already seen there is that
spectra of a galaxy 13.1
billion light years away that contains
oxygen however in what form is that
oxygen is it just floating through the
gas of that galaxy as a nebula
presumably so so what we need is not
only the oxygen but carbon nitrogen all
those other elements on the periodic
table that are typically associated with
life or at least could form molecules
complicated enough that could arrange
themselves into a self-replicating
molecule of a kind so that we could get
the process of life going
hydrogen and helium won't do it the
hydrogen is too simple heliums to inert
so we need the enriched material of
these other elements to be detected in
those distant galaxies but more than
that
we need to wait for that material to
then
coalesce once more into new stars and
planets
especially rocky planets on which
presumably
life can begin and then evolve and then
become intelligent and then become
civilized here in this part of the
universe where we now find earth it took
about 13.7 billion years for all of that
to happen generations of stars had to be
born go supernova die
and then re-coalesce into new stars and
planets before the chemistry was just
right and then once the biology got
going it was still 2 billion years of
nothing but bacteria before the complex
life began to evolve
even if we cut all of that time in half
or even by a factor of 10
should we expect to see intelligent
alien life or the science of intelligent
alien life out there i don't know
perhaps we should be optimistic are
there other processes we do not yet know
about that can lead to complex chemistry
and biological evolution if we don't
know about any such processes now how
can we search for signs of it what would
we look for but telescopes like the
james webb space telescope exist to do
precisely this
allow us to see
both what we were looking for somewhat
like a metal detector on a beach but
also now and again to reveal the
unexpected treasure the thing that we
didn't expect to show up so what we
really want in our images
is that which no existing theory can
explain but which is nevertheless
evidence a clue a hint that something is
perhaps wrong with our understanding of
the cosmos and that then leads to
creativity the attempt at a solution the
crucial component of the scientist is
then needed the thinker the imagination
of an entity that can traverse the set
of all things that can possibly be
imagined by adapting what we know and
taking into account what we do not yet
know to form a new but coherent picture
of our underlying reality the james webb
space telescope is just the beginning
as will its successor planned for launch
in 2035 b also in the name of that
telescope
origins
we are always just at the beginning
nearly scratching the surface of the
unknown and revealing more of what we do
not know and the thing about the unknown
is that by definition it's unpredictable
unforeseeable ahead of time only by
comparing what we know to what is out
there in physical reality do we ever
encounter a problem with our knowledge
by which we mean a conflict between what
we know as our best explanations of
reality and the reality itself
telescopes bring into view not merely
what we expect but also those crucial
observations that are problematic
those things we cannot readily explain
and that's where we come in not merely
our telescopes that is where people
creatively must guess the mechanism
behind the image
the thing not seen in those images the
unseen cause of the scene effect
for this is what science does
it explains the scene
in terms of the unseen
[Music]
[Applause]
you